---
title: OTP Supervision Structure
date: 2014-04-29
tags:
    - development
    - erlang
menu: main
weight: 20
---

# Swirl Supervision

## Overview

Within a typical Erlang/OTP application, a number of supervisory processes
and workers are defined. Swirl the top-level application also comprises a
number of separate modules:

- `swirl_app` the top level container for the entire swirl OTP application
- `peer_sup` and `swarm_sup`, supervisors that manage pools of peer and
  swarm workers
- `peer_worker` and `swarm_worker` to manage the individual peers and swarms
- `peer` and `swarm` modules to provide an external Erlang-based API for
  extensibility
- various helper and conversion modules

##  Supervision Tree

The high-level OTP application and process structure is as follows; the
individual worker processes are omitted for clarity:

<pre>


                            +----------------------------------+
                            |         swirl_app                |
                            |----------------------------------|
                            |      two child supervisors       |
                            |       - for peers                |
                            |       - for swarms               |
                            |                                  |
                            +---------------+------------------+
                                            |
                                            |
                      +---------------------+------------------------+
                      |                                              |
                      v                                              v
       +------------------------------+             +------------------------------+
       |       peer_sup               |             |      swarm_sup               |
       |------------------------------|             |------------------------------|
       |    manages udp listener      |             |   manages swarms             |
       |     - sends packets to       |             |      - responds to messages  |
       |       the correct swarm      |             |        from listener         |
       |                              |             |                              |
       +---------------+--------------+             +------------+-----------------+
                       |                                         |
                       |                                         +-------------+-----+
               +-------+------+----+                             |             |     |
               |              |    |                             v             |     |
               v              |    |                    +--------------------+ |     |
      +--------------------+  |    |                    |  swarm_worker      | v     |
      |   peer_worker      |  v    |                    |--------------------|+---+  |
      |--------------------|+---+  |                    |- receives parsed   |    |  v
      |- receives udp dgram|    |  v                    |  dgram/messages    |    |+---+
      |- routes to correct |    |+---+                  |- replies via peer  |    |    |
      |  swarm             |    |    | +------------+   |- maintains swarm   |    |    |
      |- sends dgrams back |    |    |                  |  metadata &amp; chunks |    |    |
      |- manages bad peers |    |    |                  +---+----------------+    |    |
      +---+----------------+    |    | +--------------&gt;     |                     |    |
          |                     |    |                      +---------------------+    |
          +---------------------+    |                       +   |                     |
               |                     |  &lt;--------------------+   +---------------------+
               +---------------------+                                +
                                                                      |
                                &lt;-------------------------------------+

</pre>

## peer_sup

The Peer supervisor manages a dynamic set of PPSPP transport listeners and
ensures that all required transport addresses (UDP port bound to a specific
IP address) are active within a given `peer_worker`. While currently each
peer_worker manages a single IP/port, it is straightforwards to run multiple
peer_workers sharing the same socket for increased throughput, and indeed
multiple peer_workers across different IP & port ranges.

## peer_worker

The peer worker is a simple `gen_server`-based loop bound to a specific
transport address. It has minimal state and has not special start or stop
requirements. It receives inbound UDP packets, determines the correct PPSPP
swarm & channel, and spawns a process to parse and route the parsed datagram
to the correct `swarm_worker` via its requested `channel`.

## swarm_sup

The swarm supervisor manages a dynamic set of PPSPP swarms, effectively a
set of workers that maintain an individual swarm (unique root hash and
therefore also chunk type, size & related metadata).

## swarm_worker

The swarm worker is a simple `gen_server`-based loop bound to a specific
channel, which has a one-to-one correspondence with a specific swarm id. As
the swarm id is based on the merkler root hash of the associated data, this
also means that the chunk size, hash function, and similar swarm parameters
are also unique for this swarm/channel. The state kept by a swarm is
slightly larger than a given peer worker, as it includes the active peers
within the swarm. At this stage it is not clear if it will be necessary, for
performance & stability, to have an associated process per remote peer in
the swarm, to track information such as downloaded / requested chunks, choke
status etc. The initial implementation contains only the set of active peers
and their channels, within the process state itself, and the full swarm
state within a related ets table, per swarm. In the event of a swarm worker
needing to be restarted, the data contained in the ets table can be
retrieved lazily as the swarm re-establishes itself.
